New `HttpClient` article (#30543)
dotnet/docs: docs/fundamentals/networking/httpclient.md

---
title: Make HTTP requests with the HttpClient
description: Learn how to make HTTP requests and handle responses with the HttpClient in .NET.
author: IEvangelist
ms.author: dapine
ms.date: 08/10/2022
---

# Make HTTP requests with the HttpClient

Hypertext Transfer Protocol (or HTTP) is a protocol for requesting resources from a web server. The <xref:System.Net.Http.HttpClient?displayProperty=fullName> class exposes the ability to send HTTP requests and receive HTTP responses from a resource identified by a URI. There are many types of resources that are available on the web, and HTTP defines a set of request methods for accessing these resources. The request methods are differentiated via several factors, first by their _verb_ but also by the following characteristics:

> - A request method is **_idempotent_** if it can be successfully processed multiple times without changing the result. For more information, see [RFC 7231: Section 4.2.2 Idempotent Methods](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc7231#section-4.2.2).

Reviewer: This set of topics and the table is important, but it doesn't seem important to lead with. Feel like an advanced set of topics where we should lead with "how do I get HTTP GET to work?"

Author: I can see that, but this isn't really advanced - in my opinion, it's more conceptual and like an overview. Perhaps, we should have a dedicated overview article that would then lead into this article, does that make sense? It could include diagrams to help visualize the request/response flow that the HTTP protocol imposes. Thoughts?

|----------:|---------------|----------------------|---------|
| `GET`     | ✔️ Yes       | ✔️ Yes               | ✔️ Yes |
| `POST`    | ❌ No         | ⚠️ <sup>†</sup>Rarely | ❌ No   |
| `PUT`     | ✔️ Yes       | ❌ No                 | ❌ No   |
| `PATCH`   | ❌ No         | ❌ No                 | ❌ No   |
| `DELETE`  | ✔️ Yes       | ❌ No                 | ❌ No   |
| `HEAD`    | ✔️ Yes       | ✔️ Yes               | ✔️ Yes |
| `OPTIONS` | ✔️ Yes       | ❌ No                 | ✔️ Yes |
| `TRACE`   | ✔️ Yes       | ❌ No                 | ✔️ Yes |
| `CONNECT` | ❌ No         | ❌ No                 | ❌ No   |

> <sup>†</sup>The `POST` method is only cacheable when the appropriate `Cache-Control` or `Expires` response headers are present. It's very uncommon in practice.

In this article, you'll learn how to make HTTP requests and handle responses with the `HttpClient` class.

> [!IMPORTANT]
> All of the example HTTP requests target one of the following URLs:
>
> - <https://jsonplaceholder.typicode.com>: Free fake API for testing and prototyping.
> - <https://www.example.com>: This domain is for use in illustrative examples in documents.

> Most commonly HTTP endpoints return JavaScript Object Notation (JSON) data, but not always. When they do, and as a convenience, the [System.Net.Http.Json](https://www.nuget.org/packages/System.Net.Http.Json) NuGet package provides several extension methods for `HttpClient` and `HttpContent` that perform automatic serialization and deserialization using `System.Text.Json`. The examples below will call attention to when these extensions are available.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Most commonly HTTP endpoints return JavaScript Object Notation (JSON) data, but not always. For convenience, the optional [System.Net.Http.Json](https://www.nuget.org/packages/System.Net.Http.Json) NuGet package provides several extension methods for `HttpClient` and `HttpContent` that perform automatic serialization and deserialization using `System.Text.Json`. The examples below will call attention to when these extensions are available.
```

- A request method is **_idempotent_** if it can be successfully processed multiple times without changing the result. For more information, see [RFC 7231: Section 4.2.2 Idempotent Methods](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc7231#section-4.2.2).
- A request method is **_cacheable_** when its corresponding response can be stored for reuse. For more information, see [RFC 7231: Section 4.2.3 Cacheable Methods](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc7231#section-4.2.3).
- A request method is considered a **safe method** if it doesn't modify the state of a resource. All _safe methods_ are also _idempotent_, but not all _idempotent_ methods are considered _safe_. For more information, see [RFC 7231: Section 4.2.1 Safe Methods](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc7231#section-4.2.1).

| HTTP verb | Is idempotent | Is cacheable         | Is safe |

> |----------:|---------------|----------------------|---------|

Reviewer 3: To me it looks funny to have the verbs right-aligned (here and in the other table) but perhaps you like it this way.

> |----------:|---------------|----------------------|---------|

Author: ```suggestion
|-----------|---------------|----------------------|---------|
```

> [!WARNING]
> Making HTTP requests is considered network I/O-bound work. While there is a synchronous <xref:System.Net.Http.HttpClient.Send%2A?displayProperty=nameWithType> method, it is recommended to use the asynchronous APIs instead, unless you have good reason not to.

### HTTP Get

A `GET` request shouldn't send a body and is used (as the verb indicates) to retrieve (or get) data from a resource. To make an HTTP `GET` request, given an `HttpClient` and a URI, use the <xref:System.Net.Http.HttpClient.GetAsync%2A?displayProperty=nameWithType> method:

:::code language="csharp" source="snippets/httpclient/Program.Get.cs" id="get":::

The preceding code:

- Makes a `GET` request to `"https://jsonplaceholder.typicode.com/todos/3"`.
- Ensures that the response is successful.
- Writes the request details to the console.
- Reads the response body as a string.
- Writes the JSON response body to the console.

The `WriteRequestToConsole` is a custom extension method that isn't part of the framework, but if you're curious how it's written, consider the following C# code:

:::code source="snippets/httpclient/HttpResponseMessageExtensions.cs":::

#### HTTP Get from JSON

> The <https://jsonplaceholder.typicode.com/todos> endpoint returns a JSON array of todo objects. Their JSON structure resembles the following:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The <https://jsonplaceholder.typicode.com/todos> endpoint returns a JSON array of "todo" objects. Their JSON structure resembles the following:
```

```json
[
  {
    "userId": 1,
    "id": 1,
    "title": "example title",
    "completed": false
  },
  {
    "userId": 1,
    "id": 2,
    "title": "another example title",
    "completed": true
  },
]
```

The C# `Todo` object is defined as follows:

:::code source="snippets/httpclient/Todo.cs":::

> It's a `record class` type, with the optional `Id`, `Title`, `Completed`, and `UserId` properties. For more information on the `record` type, see [Introduction to record types in C#](../../csharp/fundamentals/types/records.md). To automatically deserialize `GET` requests into strongly-typed C# object, use the <xref:System.Net.Http.Json.HttpClientJsonExtensions.GetFromJsonAsync%2A> extension method that's part of the [System.Net.Http.Json](https://www.nuget.org/packages/System.Net.Http.Json) NuGet package.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
It's a `record class` type, with optional `Id`, `Title`, `Completed`, and `UserId` properties. For more information on the `record` type, see [Introduction to record types in C#](../../csharp/fundamentals/types/records.md). To automatically deserialize `GET` requests into strongly typed C# object, use the <xref:System.Net.Http.Json.HttpClientJsonExtensions.GetFromJsonAsync%2A> extension method that's part of the [System.Net.Http.Json](https://www.nuget.org/packages/System.Net.Http.Json) NuGet package.
```

:::code language="csharp" source="snippets/httpclient/Program.GetFromJson.cs" id="getfromjson":::

> The preceding code:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In the preceding code:
```

> - Makes a `GET` request to `"https://jsonplaceholder.typicode.com/todos?userId=1&completed=false"`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- A `GET` request is made to `"https://jsonplaceholder.typicode.com/todos?userId=1&completed=false"`.
```

  - The query string represents the filtering criteria for the request.
- The response is automatically deserialized into a `List<Todo>` when successful.

> - The request details are written to the console, along with each `Todo`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- The request details are written to the console, along with each `Todo` object.
```

:::code language="csharp" source="snippets/httpclient/Program.PostAsJson.cs" id="postasjson":::

The preceding code:

- Serializes the `Todo` instance as JSON, and makes a `POST` request to `"https://jsonplaceholder.typicode.com/todos"`.
- Ensures that the response is successful, and writes the request details to the console.
- Deserializes the response body into a `Todo` instance, and writes the `Todo` to the console.

### HTTP Put

The `PUT` request method either replaces an existing resource or creates a new one using request body payload. To make an HTTP `PUT` request, given an `HttpClient` and a URI, use the <xref:System.Net.Http.HttpClient.PutAsync%2A?displayProperty=nameWithType> method:

:::code language="csharp" source="snippets/httpclient/Program.Put.cs" id="put":::

The preceding code:

- Prepares a <xref:System.Net.Http.StringContent> instance with the JSON body of the request (MIME type of `"application/json"`).
- Makes a `PUT` request to `"https://jsonplaceholder.typicode.com/todos/1"`.
- Ensures that the response is successful, and writes the request details and JSON response body to the console.

#### HTTP Put as JSON

> To automatically serialize `PUT` request arguments and deserialize responses into strongly-typed C# objects, use the <xref:System.Net.Http.Json.HttpClientJsonExtensions.PutAsJsonAsync%2A> extension method that's part of the [System.Net.Http.Json](https://www.nuget.org/packages/System.Net.Http.Json) NuGet package.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To automatically serialize `PUT` request arguments and deserialize responses into strongly typed C# objects, use the <xref:System.Net.Http.Json.HttpClientJsonExtensions.PutAsJsonAsync%2A> extension method that's part of the [System.Net.Http.Json](https://www.nuget.org/packages/System.Net.Http.Json) NuGet package.
```

:::code language="csharp" source="snippets/httpclient/Program.PutAsJson.cs" id="putasjson":::

The preceding code:

- Serializes the `Todo` instance as JSON, and makes a `PUT` request to `"https://jsonplaceholder.typicode.com/todos/5"`.
- Ensures that the response is successful, and writes the request details to the console.
- Deserializes the response body into a `Todo` instance, and writes the `Todo` to the console.

### HTTP Patch

> The `PATCH` request is a partial update to an existing resource. It will not create a new resource, nor is it intended to replace an existing resource, instead it updates a resource only partially. To make an HTTP `PATCH` request, given an `HttpClient` and a URI, use the <xref:System.Net.Http.HttpClient.PatchAsync%2A?displayProperty=nameWithType> method:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The `PATCH` request is a partial update to an existing resource. It won't create a new resource, and it's not intended to replace an existing resource. Instead, it updates a resource only partially. To make an HTTP `PATCH` request, given an `HttpClient` and a URI, use the <xref:System.Net.Http.HttpClient.PatchAsync%2A?displayProperty=nameWithType> method:
```

:::code language="csharp" source="snippets/httpclient/Program.Patch.cs" id="patch":::

The preceding code:

- Prepares a <xref:System.Net.Http.StringContent> instance with the JSON body of the request (MIME type of `"application/json"`).
- Makes a `PATCH` request to `"https://jsonplaceholder.typicode.com/todos/1"`.
- Ensures that the response is successful, and writes the request details and JSON response body to the console.

No extension methods exist for `PATCH` requests in the `System.Net.Http.Json` NuGet package.

### HTTP Delete

> The `DELETE` request will delete an existing resource. A `DELETE` request is _idempotent_ but not _safe_, meaning multiple `DELETE` requests to the same resources yield the same result, but the request will affect the state of the resource. To make an HTTP `DELETE` request, given an `HttpClient` and a URI, use the <xref:System.Net.Http.HttpClient.DeleteAsync%2A?displayProperty=nameWithType> method:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
A `DELETE` request deletes an existing resource. A `DELETE` request is _idempotent_ but not _safe_, meaning multiple `DELETE` requests to the same resources yield the same result, but the request will affect the state of the resource. To make an HTTP `DELETE` request, given an `HttpClient` and a URI, use the <xref:System.Net.Http.HttpClient.DeleteAsync%2A?displayProperty=nameWithType> method:
```

:::code language="csharp" source="snippets/httpclient/Program.Delete.cs" id="delete":::

The preceding code:

- Makes a `DELETE` request to `"https://jsonplaceholder.typicode.com/todos/1"`.
- Ensures that the response is successful, and writes the request details to the console.

> [!TIP]
> The response to a `DELETE` request (just like a `PUT` request) may or may not include a body.

### HTTP Head

> The `HEAD` request is similar to a `GET` request, but instead of returning the resource it only returns the headers associated with the resource. A response to the `HEAD` request will not return a body. To make an HTTP `HEAD` request, given an `HttpClient` and a URI, use the <xref:System.Net.Http.HttpClient.SendAsync%2A?displayProperty=nameWithType> method with the <xref:System.Net.Http.HttpMethod> set to `HttpMethod.Head`:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The `HEAD` request is similar to a `GET` request. Instead of returning the resource, it only returns the headers associated with the resource. A response to the `HEAD` request doesn't return a body. To make an HTTP `HEAD` request, given an `HttpClient` and a URI, use the <xref:System.Net.Http.HttpClient.SendAsync%2A?displayProperty=nameWithType> method with the <xref:System.Net.Http.HttpMethod> set to `HttpMethod.Head`:
```

:::code language="csharp" source="snippets/httpclient/Program.Head.cs" id="head":::

The preceding code:

- Makes a `HEAD` request to `"https://www.example.com/"`.
- Ensures that the response is successful, and writes the request details to the console.
- Iterates over all of the response headers, writing each one to the console.

### HTTP Options

The `OPTIONS` request is used to identify which HTTP methods a server or endpoint supports. To make an HTTP `OPTIONS` request, given an `HttpClient` and a URI, use the <xref:System.Net.Http.HttpClient.SendAsync%2A?displayProperty=nameWithType> method with the <xref:System.Net.Http.HttpMethod> set to `HttpMethod.Options`:

:::code language="csharp" source="snippets/httpclient/Program.Options.cs" id="options":::

The preceding code:

- Sends an `OPTIONS` HTTP request to `"https://www.example.com/"`.
- Ensures that the response is successful, and writes the request details to the console.
- Iterates over all of the response content headers, writing each one to the console.

### HTTP Trace

> The `TRACE` request is can be useful for debugging as it provides application-level loop-back of the request message. To make an HTTP `TRACE` request, create an <xref:System.Net.Http.HttpRequestMessage> using the `HttpMethod.Trace`:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The `TRACE` request can be useful for debugging as it provides application-level loop-back of the request message. To make an HTTP `TRACE` request, create an <xref:System.Net.Http.HttpRequestMessage> using the `HttpMethod.Trace`:
```

:::code language="csharp" source="snippets/httpclient/Program.Trace.cs" id="trace":::

> [!CAUTION]
> The `TRACE` HTTP verb is not supported by all HTTP servers. It can expose a security vulnerability if used unwisely. For more information, see [Open Web Application Security Project (OWASP): Cross Site Tracing](https://owasp.org/www-community/attacks/Cross_Site_Tracing).

## Handle an HTTP response

Whenever you're handling an HTTP response, you interact with the <xref:System.Net.Http.HttpResponseMessage> type. Several members are used when evaluating the validity of a response. The HTTP status code is available via the <xref:System.Net.Http.HttpResponseMessage.StatusCode?displayProperty=nameWithType> property. Imagine that you've sent a request given a client instance:

:::code language="csharp" source="snippets/httpclient/Program.Responses.cs" id="request":::

To ensure that the `response` is `OK` (HTTP status code 200), you can evaluate it as shown in the following example:

:::code language="csharp" source="snippets/httpclient/Program.Responses.cs" id="isstatuscode":::

> But there are additional HTTP status codes that represent a successful response, such as `CREATED` (HTTP status code 201), `ACCEPTED` (HTTP status code 202), `NO CONTENT` (HTTP status code 204), and `RESET CONTENT` (HTTP status code 205) to name a few. You can use the <xref:System.Net.Http.HttpResponseMessage.IsSuccessStatusCode?displayProperty=nameWithType> property to evaluate these codes as well, which ensures that the response status code is within the range 200-299:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
There are additional HTTP status codes that represent a successful response, such as `CREATED` (HTTP status code 201), `ACCEPTED` (HTTP status code 202), `NO CONTENT` (HTTP status code 204), and `RESET CONTENT` (HTTP status code 205). You can use the <xref:System.Net.Http.HttpResponseMessage.IsSuccessStatusCode?displayProperty=nameWithType> property to evaluate these codes as well, which ensures that the response status code is within the range 200-299:
```

:::code language="csharp" source="snippets/httpclient/Program.Responses.cs" id="issuccessstatuscode":::

> If you need to have the framework throw the <xref:System.Net.Http.HttpRequestException>, you can call the <xref:System.Net.Http.HttpResponseMessage.EnsureSuccessStatusCode?displayProperty=nameWithType>:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If you need to have the framework throw the <xref:System.Net.Http.HttpRequestException>, you can call the <xref:System.Net.Http.HttpResponseMessage.EnsureSuccessStatusCode?displayProperty=nameWithType> method:
```

:::code language="csharp" source="snippets/httpclient/Program.Responses.cs" id="ensurestatuscode":::

> This will throw an `HttpRequestException` if the response status code is not within the range 200-299.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This code will throw an `HttpRequestException` if the response status code is not within the range 200-299.
```

With a valid response, you can access the response body using the <xref:System.Net.Http.HttpResponseMessage.Content> property. The body is available as an <xref:System.Net.Http.HttpContent> instance, which you can use to access the body as a stream, byte array, or string:

:::code language="csharp" source="snippets/httpclient/Program.Responses.cs" id="stream":::

In the preceding code, the `responseStream` can be used to read the response body.

:::code language="csharp" source="snippets/httpclient/Program.Responses.cs" id="array":::

In the preceding code, the `responseByteArray` can be used to read the response body.

:::code language="csharp" source="snippets/httpclient/Program.Responses.cs" id="string":::

In the preceding code, the `responseString` can be used to read the response body.

> Finally, when you know an HTTP endpoint returns JSON you can use the  [System.Net.Http.Json](https://www.nuget.org/packages/System.Net.Http.Json) NuGet package to deserialize the response body into any valid C# object:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Finally, when you know an HTTP endpoint returns JSON, you can deserialize the response body into any valid C# object by using the [System.Net.Http.Json](https://www.nuget.org/packages/System.Net.Http.Json) NuGet package:
```

:::code language="csharp" source="snippets/httpclient/Program.Responses.cs" id="json":::

> In the preceding code, the `result` is the deserialized response body as the type `T`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In the preceding code, `result` is the response body deserialized as the type `T`.
```
